.TH GITIGNORE 1 "January 2026" "gitignore 2.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
gitignore \- professional .gitignore file generator with smart features
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gitignore
[\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR]
[\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-verbose\fR]
[\fB\-q\fR|\fB\-\-quiet\fR]
[\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
[\fB\-i\fR|\fB\-\-init\fR|\fBinit\fR] [\fIlanguages...\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
[\fB\-s\fR|\fB\-\-sync\fR|\fBsync\fR] \fIlanguages...\fR
.br
.B gitignore
[\fB\-l\fR|\fB\-\-list\fR|\fBlist\fR] [\fIfilter\fR] [\fB\-\-local\fR|\fB\-\-builtin\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
[\fBshow\fR|\fBcat\fR] \fItemplate\fR
.br
.B gitignore
[\fBauto\fR|\fB\-\-auto\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
[\fB\-I\fR|\fBinteractive\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
[\fBappend\fR|\fBupdate\fR] \fIlanguages...\fR
.br
.B gitignore
[\fB\-a\fR|\fB\-\-add\fR] \fIpattern\fR
.br
.B gitignore
\fIfile_or_pattern\fR
.br
.B gitignore
\fBglobal\fR [\fBinit\fR|\fBadd\fR \fIlanguages...\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
[\fBbackup\fR|\fBrestore\fR [\fIbackup_name\fR]|\fBbackups\fR|\fBhistory\fR]
.br
.B gitignore
\fBcache clear\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gitignore
is a professional command-line tool that helps you create and manage .gitignore files
for your projects. It supports multiple programming languages, custom templates,
auto-detection of project types, and can sync templates directly from GitHub's 
official gitignore repository.

The tool features smart duplicate removal, template caching, automatic backups,
interactive mode, global gitignore support, and the ability to add file patterns
directly to your .gitignore.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help information and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Display version information and feature status.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-verbose
Enable verbose output with detailed operation information.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Quiet mode - only display errors.
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Show what would happen without making any changes.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-init ", " init " " [\fIlanguages...\fR]
Initialize a .gitignore file. If no languages are specified, uses auto.gitignore
template if it exists, otherwise creates an empty file. If languages are specified,
merges the corresponding templates.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-sync ", " sync " " \fIlanguages...\fR
Download and merge templates from GitHub's official gitignore repository.
Requires internet connection. At least one language must be specified.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-list ", " list " " [\fIfilter\fR] [\fB\-\-local\fR|\fB\-\-builtin\fR]
List available templates. Optionally filter by keyword. Use --local to show only
custom templates or --builtin to show only built-in templates.
.TP
.BR show ", " cat " " \fItemplate\fR
Display the contents of a template before using it.
.TP
.BR auto ", " \-\-auto
Auto-detect project type by scanning for configuration files (package.json,
requirements.txt, Cargo.toml, etc.) and create appropriate .gitignore.
.TP
.BR \-I ", " interactive
Launch interactive mode with a menu to select templates.
.TP
.BR append " " \fIlanguages...\fR
Append templates to existing .gitignore without removing existing content.
.TP
.BR update " " \fIlanguages...\fR
Smart merge templates into existing .gitignore, removing duplicates.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-add " " \fIpattern\fR
Force add a pattern to .gitignore, even if it matches a template name.
Useful when the pattern name is ambiguous.
.TP
.BR global " " init
Create a global .gitignore file at ~/.gitignore_global for system-wide patterns.
.TP
.BR global " " add " " \fIlanguages...\fR
Add templates to the global .gitignore file.
.TP
.BR backup
Create a timestamped backup of the current .gitignore file.
.TP
.BR restore " " [\fIbackup_name\fR]
Restore .gitignore from a backup. If no backup name is specified, lists available backups.
.TP
.BR backups ", " history
List all available backup files.
.TP
.BR cache " " clear
Clear the template cache (downloaded templates are cached for 24 hours).

.SH ADDING PATTERNS
.B gitignore
can intelligently add file patterns directly to your .gitignore:

.TP
.B gitignore \fIfile_or_pattern\fR
Add a file or pattern to .gitignore. The tool automatically detects if the argument
is a pattern (contains /, ., or *) or a template name.

Examples:
.br
  gitignore node_modules/     # Adds the pattern "node_modules/"
.br
  gitignore *.log             # Adds the pattern "*.log"
.br
  gitignore .env              # Adds the pattern ".env"
.br
  gitignore python            # Uses Python template (not a pattern)

.TP
.B gitignore \-a \fIpattern\fR
Force add as a pattern when the name is ambiguous. For example, if you want to add
"rust" as a pattern instead of using the Rust template:
.br
  gitignore --add rust        # Adds "rust" as a pattern

.SH CONFIGURATION
.TP
.B Custom templates directory:
$HOME/.config/gitignore/templates/
.TP
.B Auto template:
$HOME/.config/gitignore/templates/auto.gitignore
.TP
.B Configuration file:
$HOME/.config/gitignore/config.conf
.TP
.B Cache directory:
$HOME/.config/gitignore/cache/
.TP
.B Backup directory:
$HOME/.config/gitignore/backups/

Custom templates in the configuration directory take priority over built-in
templates. The auto.gitignore template is used when running
.B gitignore init
without any language arguments.

.SS Configuration File Options
The config.conf file supports the following options:

.TP
.B auto_backup=true|false
Automatically create backups before modifying .gitignore (default: false)
.TP
.B cache_enabled=true|false
Enable template caching for faster operations (default: true)
.TP
.B cache_duration=seconds
Cache duration in seconds (default: 86400 = 24 hours)
.TP
.B verbose=true|false
Enable verbose output by default (default: false)
.TP
.B use_color=true|false
Enable colored terminal output (default: auto-detected)

.SH AUTO-DETECTION
The auto-detect feature scans the current directory for project files and
automatically suggests appropriate templates:

.TP
.B Detected Files and Languages:
.br
package.json → node
.br
requirements.txt, setup.py, Pipfile → python
.br
Cargo.toml → rust
.br
go.mod → go
.br
pom.xml, build.gradle → java
.br
Gemfile → ruby
.br
composer.json → php
.br
.vscode → vscode
.br
.idea → intellij
.br
CMakeLists.txt, Makefile → c

The tool also automatically includes OS-specific patterns (macOS, Linux, or Windows).

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Basic Usage
.TP
.B gitignore init
Create .gitignore using auto.gitignore or create empty file
.TP
.B gitignore init python node
Create .gitignore with Python and Node.js templates
.TP
.B gitignore sync rust c cpp
Download and merge Rust, C, and C++ templates from GitHub
.TP
.B gitignore \-i python vscode
Create .gitignore with Python and VS Code templates

.SS Advanced Features
.TP
.B gitignore auto
Auto-detect project type and create appropriate .gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore interactive
Launch interactive mode to select templates from a menu
.TP
.B gitignore list
List all available templates (custom and built-in)
.TP
.B gitignore list web
Filter templates containing "web"
.TP
.B gitignore show python
Preview Python template contents
.TP
.B gitignore append rust
Append Rust template to existing .gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore update node vscode
Smart merge Node.js and VS Code templates (removes duplicates)

.SS Adding Patterns
.TP
.B gitignore node_modules/
Add "node_modules/" pattern to .gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore *.log
Add "*.log" pattern to .gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore .env
Add ".env" pattern to .gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore --add rust
Force add "rust" as a pattern (not template)

.SS Global gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore global init
Create global .gitignore at ~/.gitignore_global
.TP
.B gitignore global add macos vscode
Add macOS and VS Code patterns to global .gitignore
.TP
.B git config --global core.excludesfile ~/.gitignore_global
Configure git to use the global .gitignore

.SS Backup and Restore
.TP
.B gitignore backup
Create a timestamped backup of current .gitignore
.TP
.B gitignore backups
List all available backups
.TP
.B gitignore restore
List backups and select one to restore
.TP
.B gitignore restore gitignore_20260109_143022.bak
Restore specific backup

.SS Dry Run
.TP
.B gitignore --dry-run init python node
Preview what would be created without actually creating it
.TP
.B gitignore --dry-run auto
Preview auto-detected templates
.TP
.B gitignore --verbose sync rust
Download Rust template with detailed output

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/gitignore/templates/*.gitignore
Custom user templates. These override built-in templates.
.TP
.I ~/.config/gitignore/templates/auto.gitignore
Auto template used with plain 'init' command.
.TP
.I ~/.config/gitignore/config.conf
User configuration file.
.TP
.I ~/.config/gitignore/cache/*
Cached downloaded templates (24-hour TTL by default).
.TP
.I ~/.config/gitignore/backups/*
Backup files created automatically or manually.
.TP
.I ~/.gitignore_global
Global gitignore file for system-wide patterns.

.SH FEATURES
.TP
.B Smart Duplicate Removal
Automatically removes duplicate patterns when merging templates.
.TP
.B Template Caching
Downloaded templates are cached for 24 hours to speed up repeated operations.
.TP
.B Automatic Backups
Optionally create automatic backups before modifying .gitignore.
.TP
.B Project Auto-Detection
Scan project files and suggest appropriate templates.
.TP
.B Interactive Mode
User-friendly menu for selecting templates.
.TP
.B Global gitignore Support
Manage system-wide ignore patterns.
.TP
.B Custom Templates
Create and use your own templates.
.TP
.B Colored Output
Beautiful, informative terminal display with color coding.
.TP
.B Progress Indicators
Visual progress bars for download operations.
.TP
.B Pattern Addition
Directly add file patterns without using templates.

.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
Duplicate file patterns are automatically removed when merging templates.
.IP \(bu 2
Arguments starting with '#' are treated as comments and ignored.
.IP \(bu 2
Custom templates in ~/.config/gitignore/templates/ override built-in templates.
.IP \(bu 2
Sync command requires libcurl and internet connection.
.IP \(bu 2
Templates are cached for 24 hours by default (configurable).
.IP \(bu 2
The tool intelligently distinguishes between patterns and template names.
.IP \(bu 2
Use --dry-run to preview any operation without making changes.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used to locate the configuration directory at $HOME/.config/gitignore

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
General error (file not found, permission denied, invalid arguments, etc.)

.SH AUTHOR
Created by gitignore contributors for developers who value clean repositories.

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/mahbubhs/gitignore/issues

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright © 2026 gitignore contributors. License: MIT

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git (1),
.BR git-config (1),
.BR gitignore (5)

Full documentation available at: https://github.com/mahbubhs/gitignore

Official gitignore templates: https://github.com/github/gitignore